---
title: >
  Auditory attention switching with listening difficulty: Behavioral and pupillometric measures
runningtitle: Attention switching with listening difficulty
author:
- name: Daniel R. McCloy
  orcid: 0000-0002-7572-3241
  email: drmccloy@uw.edu
  affiliation:
  - Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, 1715 NE Columbia Rd., Box 357988, Seattle, WA 98195-7988
  - University of Washington, Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, 1417 NE 42nd Street, Box 354875, Seattle, WA 98105-6246
- name: Eric Larson
  orcid: 0000-0003-4782-5360
  email: larsoner@uw.edu
  affiliation:
  - Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, 1715 NE Columbia Rd., Box 357988, Seattle, WA 98195-7988
- name: Adrian K. C. Lee
  orcid: 0000-0002-7611-0500
  email: akclee@uw.edu
  corresponding: true
  affiliation:
  - Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, 1715 NE Columbia Rd., Box 357988, Seattle, WA 98195-7988
  - University of Washington, Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, 1417 NE 42nd Street, Box 354875, Seattle, WA 98105-6246
bibliography: bib/capd-pupillometry.bib
appendix: false
abstract: >
  Pupillometry has emerged as a useful tool for studying listening effort. Past
  work involving listeners with normal audiological thresholds has shown that
  switching attention between competing talker streams evokes pupil dilation
  indicative of listening effort [McCloy et al (2017), *J. Acoust. Soc. Am*
  141(4):2440]. The current experiment examines behavioral and pupillometric
  data from a two-stream target detection task requiring attention-switching
  between auditory streams, in two participant groups: audiometrically normal
  listeners who self-report difficulty localizing sound sources and/or
  understanding speech in reverberant or acoustically crowded environments, and
  their age-matched controls who do not report such  problems. Three
  experimental conditions varied the number and type of stream segregation cues
  available. Participants who reported listening difficulty showed both
  behavioral and pupillometric signs of increased effort compared to controls,
  especially in trials where listeners had to switch attention between streams,
  or trials where only a single stream segregation cue was available.
keywords:
- pupillometry
- auditory attention
- listening effort
- suprathreshold deficits
preprint: 10.31234/osf.io/2ubyj
acknowledgments: >
  Portions of this work were supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH)
  Grant Nos. R01-DC013260 to A.K.C.L., F32-DC012456 to E.L., T32-DC005361 to
  the University of Washington, and NIH LRP awards to E.L. and D.R.M. The
  authors are grateful to Ross Maddox for providing questionnaire responses and
  binaural health measures on the participants in this study.
---

# Introduction

Pupillometry has emerged as a useful tool for studying the effort associated
with auditory perception in sub-optimal listening conditions, encompassing both
task difficulty (e.g., stimulus degradations) and the  listener’s application
of mental resources to the task [@PichoraFullerEtAl2016; @Winn2018]. However,
not all difficult listening situations induce equivalent pupillary responses.
Past work has shown that when the task involves simple detection of target
speech sounds, stimulus degradations such as reverberation or vocoding incur a
behavioral cost in accuracy and/or reaction time, but cause little to no change
in the pupillary response; in contrast, requiring the listener to switch
attention between auditory streams induces both behavioral cost and changes to
the pupillary response [@McCloyEtAl2017]. This difference has been attributed
to the efficacy of listener effort at improving performance: listeners cannot
make vocoded stimuli any less degraded by trying harder, but increased listener
effort can improve deployment of selective attention.

When stimuli comprise longer spans of speech (so that contextual
meaning becomes relevant), several studies have found increased dilation in
response to decreased intelligibility.  This occurs whether the decline in
intelligibility results from increased background noise [@ZekveldEtAl2010],
using speech as a masker signal [@KoelewijnEtAl2012], or spectrally degrading
the target sentences [@WinnEtAl2015].  This change in dilation can be
interpreted as a reflection of listener effort stemming from the online
construction of sentential meaning from component words, e.g., the effort to
reanalyze misperceived words in light of veridical perception of other words in
the same sentence [cf. discussion in @WinnEtAl2015].  Pupillometry has also
revealed increased dilation (interpreted as effort) for older listeners and for
listeners with impaired function in the auditory periphery  [@ZekveldEtAl2011;
@KuchinskyEtAl2013; @WinnEtAl2015].  <!-- However, non-peripheral auditory
processing dysfunctions such as (central) auditory processing disorder [(C)APD;
@ASHA2005] or “hidden hearing loss” [@ZhaoStephens2007] are less well
characterized, especially with regard to listening effort.  Listeners with
non-peripheral auditory deficits are especially interesting as a means of
studying the interaction between the auditory system and other cognitive
systems such as attention. --> However, many listeners who have clinically
normal hearing nevertheless complain of difficulties in acoustically crowded
listening conditions [@RugglesEtAl2011], which may stem from supra-threshold
coding deficits [@BharadwajEtAl2014].  It is reasonable to hypothesize that
their complaints reflect increased listening effort — perhaps resulting from
supra-threshold deficits — but to our knowledge, pupillometry has never been
used to study listening effort in such populations.  This study presents
evidence that people who self-report difficulty in challenging listening
conditions show both behavioral and pupillometric differences from listeners
who do not report such difficulties.

<!--Unfortunately, diagnostic criteria for (C)APD are contentious
[@DawesBishop2009; @WilsonArnott2012] and diagnoses are skewed toward
school-aged children, making it challenging to recruit an adult study
population.  For this reason,--> In designing this study we defined a
“listening difficulty” group as listeners with clinically normal hearing who
self-report difficulty localizing sound sources and/or understanding speech in
reverberant or acoustically crowded environments, based on two yes/no screening
questions (see Section \ref{ssq} for details), and complemented them with
age-matched controls who do not report such difficulties.  The task was a
two-stream target detection task with a pre-trial cue indicating the need to
maintain attention to one stream throughout the trial, or to switch attention
between streams at a designated mid-trial pause. Listeners were tested in three
conditions with differing stream segregation cues: one with two same-voice
talkers separated only by simulated spatial cues, one with two co-located
different-voice talkers, and one where both spatial and voice cues were
available to support stream segregation. \added{These cue types (spatial and
voice-identity cues, and their combination) were chosen in hopes of determining
whether self-reported difficulty with spatial hearing was in fact confined to
cases of spatially segregable talkers, or reflected a more general difficulty
with selective attention in the presence of competing speech.}
We analyzed listeners’ behavioral and
pupillary responses to investigate how those objective measures relate to
their self-reported experience of listening difficulty.

# Methods

\deleted[incorporated into subsequent sub-sections]{The methods for this study
closely follow those in @McCloyEtAl2017. Briefly,
the task involves detecting targets in two synchronous streams of spoken
alphabet letters, preceded by an auditory cue indicating (1) spatial location
of the stream listeners should attend to at trial start, and (2) whether to
maintain attention to that stream throughout the trial, or switch attention to
the other stream after a mid-trial pause. A diagram of the trial structure is
given in Figure \ref{fig-trial-diagram}.}

## Participants {#ssq}

Twelve adults with self-reported listening difficulty (aged 21 to 66 years)
participated in this study, along with twelve control subjects.  “Listening
difficulty” was defined by an affirmative answer to either of two screening
questions drawn from the Speech, Spatial, and Qualities of Hearing assessment
[@SSQ].  The questions were:

1. “Do you have difficulty understanding speech in the presence of background noise or in large rooms that echo?”
2. “Do you have difficulty determining where a sound came from without having to look?”

Because the pupillary response changes with age [@Kumnick1954], a control
subject was matched to within two years of age (at the time of testing) for
each of the listening difficulty subjects. Despite the reported listening
difficulties, all participants in both groups had normal audiometric thresholds
(20 dB HL or better at octave frequencies from 250 Hz to 8 kHz).  All
participants were compensated at an hourly rate, and gave informed consent to
participate as overseen by the University of Washington Institutional Review
Board.

## Stimuli

\added{The methods for this study closely follow those in
\citet{McCloyEtAl2017}.} Stimuli comprised spoken English alphabet letters from the ISOLET v1.3
corpus [@ColeEtAl1990alt] from one female and one male talker. <!-- Mean
fundamental frequencies of the unprocessed recordings were 103 Hz (male talker)
and 193 Hz (female talker).--> Letters were silence padded, RMS-normalized and
windowed as described in @McCloyEtAl2017, except that here the letters were
padded to a final duration of 400 ms (instead of 500 ms as in the previous
study).  Two streams of four letters each were generated for each trial, with a
gap between the second and third letters of each stream.  The letters “A” and
“U” were used only in the pre-trial cues (described below); the target letter
was “O” and letters “DEGPV” were non-target items.  Target onsets were always
separated from each other by at least 1 s (regardless of stream); thus there
were at most two “O” tokens per trial (overall, ¼ of trials had zero “O”
tokens, ½ had one, and ¼ had two).  For trials with only spatial cues, the two
streams were the same talker spatialized to left and right sides at ±30°
azimuth. For trials with only non-spatial cues, the streams were a male and
female voice co-located at either +30° or −30° azimuth. For trials with both
cues (the “mixed cue” condition), streams were both spatialized to ±30° and
comprised voices from different-gender talkers. Stream spatialization was
simulated using binaural room impulse responses [BRIRs;
@ShinnCunninghamEtAl2005] truncated to include only the direct impulse
response.  Unlike @McCloyEtAl2017, no degradation (vocoding or reverberation)
was applied to the stimuli.

## Procedure

Except where noted, stimulus delivery replicated procedures used in
@McCloyEtAl2017.  \added{A diagram of the trial structure is given in Figure
\ref{fig-trial-diagram}.}
Subjects heard sounds over insert earphones in a darkened
soundproof booth, with illumination adjusted to put each subject’s baseline
pupil dilation in the center of its dynamic range [@McCloyEtAl2016].  Pupil
size was continuously measured with an EyeLink1000 infra-red eye tracker (SR
Research, Kanata, ON) at 1000 Hz sampling frequency, with participants’ heads
stabilized on a chin rest and forehead bar 50 cm from the camera. Participants
were instructed to fixate on a white dot centered on a dark screen and
maintain this gaze throughout test blocks.

![(Color online). Illustration of “maintain” and “switch” trial types. In the depicted “maintain” trial (heavy solid line), listeners would hear cue “AA” in a male voice, attend to the male voice (“EOPO”) throughout the trial, and respond twice (once for each “O”). In the depicted “switch” trial (heavy dashed line), listeners would hear cue “AU” in a male voice, attend to the male voice (“EO”) for the first half of the trial and the female voice (“DE”) for the second half of the trial, and respond once (to the “O” occurring at 1.6–2.0 seconds).\label{fig-trial-diagram}](figures/trial-diagram.pdf)

Each trial began with an 800 ms auditory cue (spoken letters “AA” or “AU”); the
location and gender of the cue talker conveyed the location and gender of the
to-be-attended stream, and the letters spoken indicated whether to maintain
attention to that stream throughout the trial (“AA” cue) or to switch attention
to the other talker at the mid-trial gap (“AU” cue).  A 400 ms pause followed
the cue, after which the two concurrent 4-letter streams began, with a 600 ms
gap between the second and third letters. This mid-trial “switching gap”
duration was chosen to ensure adequate time for an auditory attention switch,
which has been shown to require 300-400 ms to execute [@LarsonLee2013a].  The
task was to respond by button press to the letter “O” spoken by the target
talker while ignoring “O” tokens spoken by the competing talker (cf. Figure
\ref{fig-trial-diagram}).

There were 8 blocks of 48 trials each, for a total of 384 trials.  The gender
and location of the cue talker was fixed for each block of trials.  The order
of blocks and trials was counterbalanced across subjects.  The first
experimental block was preceded by six short training blocks, exposing
listeners gradually to the maintain- and switch-attention conditions and to the
spatial, non-spatial, and mixed-cue stimuli.  Training blocks were repeated
until participants achieved ≥80% of trials correct on mixed-maintain or
mixed-switch blocks, ≥70% on mixed blocks containing both maintain and switch
trials, and ≥50% on blocks containing a mix of all of the segregation-cue and
attentional conditions.

## Data analysis

Listener responses were labeled as “hits” if a button press occurred between
100 and 800 ms after the onset of an “O” token in the target stream, and
“misses” if there was no response in that window.  Responses at any other time
during the trial were considered “false alarms,” and lack of response in the
100-800 ms window following timing slots lacking target-stream “O” tokens were
considered “correct rejections.”  Reaction time was recorded for all button
presses, but only reaction times for hits were analyzed.

Response accuracy and reaction time were modeled with (generalized) linear
mixed-effects regression using the `afex` package in `R` [@afex-0.21-2].  A
reaction time linear model predicted latency of button press at each timing
slot from interactions among trial parameters (maintain/switch attention,
spatial/non-spatial/mixed cue) and indicator variables encoding listener group
(listening difficulty or control) and timing slot number (four slots per trial,
see Figure \ref{fig-trial-diagram}). A random intercept was also estimated for
each participant.  Significance of model coefficients was computed via
_t_-tests using the Satterthwaite approximation for degrees of freedom [@Satterthwaite1946].

The model of response accuracy predicted probability of button press from
interactions of attention and segregation-cue trial parameters, indicators for
participant group and target/foil presence/absence, and a random intercept for
each participant. An indicator for trial slot was not included due to issues
with model convergence.  This model transformed response probabilities into
continuous values suitable for linear modeling using an inverse probit link
function, which allows interpretation of coefficient estimates as differences
on a d′ scale [@DeCarlo1998; @SheuEtAl2008; @McCloyLee2015].  Significance of
model coefficients was determined using Wald _z_-tests.

Pupil diameter recordings were epoched from −0.5 to 5.9 s for each trial, with
0 s defined as the cue onset.  Treatment of eye blinks, normalization, and
deconvolution of pupil time courses followed the procedures described in
@McCloyEtAl2017. The deconvolved time series can be interpreted as an indicator
of mental effort that is time-aligned to the stimulus [i.e., the response
latency of the pupillary response has been effectively removed; see
@McCloyEtAl2016, for a longer discussion of how this measure is
interpreted]. Statistical comparison of deconvolved pupil dilation time series
(i.e., “effort” in Figures \ref{pupil-across-groups} and
\ref{pupil-within-subjs}) used a non-parametric cluster-level <!--one-sample-->
_t_-test [@MarisOostenveld2007; @McCloyEtAl2016] on the paired differences in
deconvolved pupil size between groups (Figure \ref{pupil-across-groups}) or
attentional conditions (Figure \ref{pupil-within-subjs}). <!--Note that for the
between-groups comparisons, the difference between groups was computed with
matched pairs of subjects aligned; a more conservative between-groups _F_-test
did not change the results.-->

## Post-hoc analyses {#posthocs}

\added[moved from results/post-hoc analyses section]{To further test the
relationship between pupillary responses and auditory
spatial abilities, post-hoc comparisons were made between summary measures of
each subject’s pupillary response, and each subject’s component scores on the
full Speech, Spatial, and Qualities of Hearing assessment \citep[SSQ;][]{SSQ}. Summary
pupillometry measures were also compared to each subject’s scores on a range of
behavioral measures representing binaural health: binaural masking level
differences with in-phase noise and in-phase or anti-phase signals (500 Hz
signal; $N_0S_0$ and $N_0S_\pi$), frequency modulation detection thresholds
(500 Hz; monaural), interaural time- and level-difference detection thresholds
(ITD/ILD), alternating interaural phase detection thresholds (low-frequency
temporal fine structure test), and two versions of the Coordinate Response
Measure task (CRM; spatially separated or co-located talkers). The summary
pupillometry measures computed were mean peak amplitude, mean peak latency, and
mean area under the curve (AUC).  The difference in AUC between attention
conditions (switch minus maintain) was also computed.}

# Results

## Response accuracy

Over all trials, sensitivity (d′) ranged across subjects from 1.2 to 4.1 (first
quartile 2.2, median 2.7, third quartile 3.2).  The model estimated main
effects for token type (target, foil, or neither), interactions between token
type and each of the trial predictors (maintain/switch attention and
spatial/non-spatial/mixed cue) and participant group (listening
difficulty/control), and interactions between token type and each pair of
predictors.[^supp]  A model that included the four-way interaction of
`token_type:attention:cue_type:participant_group` was also created, but it did
not provide a significantly better fit to the data based on nested model
comparison using a likelihood ratio test (*χ*²(6)=2.95, _p_=0.82).

The response accuracy model is summarized in Figure \ref{accuracy}, which shows
main effects of each predictor in the left half of each panel, and interactions
among predictors in the right half of each panel.  The probability of
participant response to target items was higher (Figure \ref{accuracy}A), and
response to foils was lower (Figure \ref{accuracy}D) in maintain- versus
switch-attention trials. \replaced{A similar trend (not statistically significant)
was seen when comparing subject populations (Figure \ref{accuracy}B,E),
though}{When comparing subject populations},
there was a significant difference between the control and listening difficulty
groups in spurious responses (where neither target nor foil were present;
Figure \ref{accuracy}H) \added{but not for responses to target or foil
items (Figure \ref{accuracy}B,E)}. For the cue type predictor, both spatial and
non-spatial cue conditions showed the same pattern relative to the \deleted{baseline}
mixed-cue condition: reduced response to targets, and elevated response to both
foil items and items that were neither target nor foil (Figure
\ref{accuracy}C,F,I). Mean d′ values for each condition, which incorporate
target, foil, and spurious responses into a single measure of detection
sensitivity, are given in the bottom row of Figure \ref{accuracy} (panels
J,K,L), with error bars indicating standard deviation across subjects.

![(Color online).  Summary of main effects and interactions in the model of response accuracy.  The top three rows reflect probability of button-press response to either targets, foil items, or non-target non-foil items (cf. row labels on right side of figure).  Lines in panels A-I connect estimated marginal means (EMMs) for the various predictors; vertical error bars show 95% confidence intervals for the EMMs<!-- (based on _z_-tests rather than _t_-tests, since denominator degrees-of-freedom estimation is not available for generalized mixed effects models)-->.  In those panels, the left-hand line (light gray) shows the main effect indicated on the abscissa; the set of colored lines on the right side of each panel illustrates an interaction between the predictor on the abscissa and the predictor indicated by the legend key at the top of each column.  The bottom row combines data from the top three rows into a single measure of detection sensitivity (d′), showing mean ± 1 standard deviation of d′ values across subjects.  See text for discussion of each panel. * indicates _p_<0.05, ** indicates _p_<0.01, *** indicates _p_<0.001.\label{accuracy}](figures/accuracy-figure-probit.pdf)

In general, difficult experimental conditions \replaced{seem}{seemed} to increase all types of
errors: missed targets, false alarm responses to foil items, and false alarm
responses to non-target non-foil items.  The largest effect \replaced{is}{was} seen in the
condition in which only spatial cues are available: in that condition,
responses to foil items \replaced{are}{were} much higher among participants with listening
difficulty than among controls (Figure \ref{accuracy}E, right side).  There \replaced{is}{was}
also an unexpected interaction: there \replaced{is}{was} no difference in responses to foil
items between maintain- and switch-attention trials when only spatial cues are
present, whereas the non-spatial and mixed-cue conditions \replaced{do}{did} show a difference
in response rate to foil items between the maintain- and switch-attention
trials (Figure \ref{accuracy}F, right side).

<!--
There were also two significant interactions among the predictors, both
occurring in response to foil items.  First, the gap between participants with
listening difficulty and age-matched controls was much larger for the
spatial-cue trials than for the non-spatial or mixed-cue trials (Figure
\ref{accuracy}E, right side).  Second, the gap between responses to foils in
spatial- versus mixed-cue trials was larger when maintaining attention than
when switching attention (Figure \ref{accuracy}F, right side).
-->

## Reaction time

Over all correct responses, median reaction time for each subject ranged from
352 ms to 574 ms after the onset of the target letter. Model
coefficients[^supp] indicated faster reaction times in timing slots 2-4
compared to slot 1 (Figure \ref{rt}D), slower reaction times in slot 3 in
switch-attention trials relative to maintain-attention trials (Figure
\ref{rt}E), slower reaction times in slots 3 and 4 in non-spatial trials
relative to mixed-cue trials (Figure \ref{rt}G), and slower reaction times in
slot 4 of non-spatial switch trials among participants with listening
difficulty (Figure \ref{rt}H).
<!-- significant main effects of spatial condition (_F_(2, 7705.2)=29.50,
_p_<0.001), attentional condition (_F_(1, 7706.0)=36.02, _p_<0.001), and timing
slot (_F_(3, 7706.4)=577.43, _p_<0.001), but no main effect of participant
group.  Post-hoc analysis of spatial condition showed slower response times in
the non-spatial condition relative to both the spatial (_β_=23 ms,
_t_(7705.2)=6.07, _p_<0.001) and the mixed (_β_=27 ms, _t_(7705.1)=7.12,
_p_<0.001) conditions, but no difference between spatial and mixed (_β_=4 ms,
_p_=0.59).-->

![(Color online).  Summary of main effects and significant interactions in the model of reaction time.  The top row of panels represent model coefficients for the main effects of attention (A), participant group (B), spatial condition (C), and timing slot (D).  Panels E-G show interactions between timing slot and attention, participant group, and spatial condition (respectively).  Panel (H) illustrates the significant four-way interaction, showing how reaction time in slot 4 of non-spatial switch-attention trials is longer for participants with listening difficulty than for age-matched controls.  Lines on each plot connect estimated marginal means (EMMs) for the various predictors; vertical error bars show 95% confidence intervals for the EMMs. * indicates _p_<0.05, ** indicates _p_<0.01, *** indicates _p_<0.001.\label{rt}](figures/rt-figure.pdf)

<!--
The main effect of attention showed slower reaction times by 19 ms on average
in the switch-attention trials (_t_(7706.0)=6.00, _p_<0.001). There was also
a significant interaction between attention and spatial conditions (_F_(2,
7705.1)=3.03, _p_=0.048): post-hoc tests showed that the switch−maintain
difference was significant for mixed (_β_=27 ms, _t_(7705.5)=5.14, _p_<0.001)
and non-spatial trials (_β_=20 ms, _t_(7705.3)=3.71, _p_<0.001), but not in
spatial trials (_β_=5 ms, _p_=0.11).

Post-hoc pairwise tests showed the main effect of timing slot comprised
significantly faster response times in slot 2 (_β_=135 ms, _t_(7706.3)=30.50,
_p_<0.001) and slot 4 (_β_=133 ms, _t_(7706.8)=30.23, _p_<0.001) compared to
slot 1, and no reliable difference between slots 1 and 3 (_β_=6 ms, _p_=0.51)
or slots 2 and 4 (_β_=2 ms, _p_=0.95).  Finally, there were significant
interactions between timing slot and spatial condition (_F_(6, 7705.1)=3.44,
_p_=0.002), timing slot and attentional condition (_F_(3, 7705.3)=12.14,
_p_<0.001), timing slot and listener group (_F_(3, 7706.5)=2.82, _p_=0.037),
and a three-way interaction among timing slot, listener group, and attentional
condition (_F_(3, 7705.3)=5.74, _p_<0.001).  Post-hoc tests for these
interactions indicated significantly slower response times in non-spatial
trials in slots 3 (vs. spatial trials: _β_=24 ms, _t_(7705.2)=2.95, _p_=0.009;
vs. mixed trials: _β_=35 ms, _t_(7705.2)=4.34, _p_<0.001) and 4 (vs. spatial
trials: _β_=44 ms, _t_(7705.0)=6.12, _p_<0.001; vs. mixed trials _β_=46 ms,
_t_(7705.0)=6.39, _p_<0.001) and significantly slower response times in
switch-attention trials in slots 3 (_β_=45 ms, _t_(7705.5)=4.82, _p_<0.001) and
4 (_β_=59 ms, _t_(7705.4)=7.01, _p_<0.001) for listening difficulty subjects,
but only in slot 3 for control subjects (_β_=37 ms, _t_(7705.2)=3.95,
_p_<0.001).  Although the omnibus test of listener group × slot was significant
as indicated above, post-hoc tests of participant group by slot all failed to
reject the null hypothesis of a difference in reaction times between the
groups.
-->

## Pupillometry

Average deconvolved pupillary responses for the control and listening
difficulty groups are shown in Figure \ref{pupil-across-groups}, for each of
the segregation cue conditions (columns) and attentional conditions (rows).
There appears to be a trend toward larger, later peak pupillary responses among
the listening difficulty subjects especially in the switch-attention trials
(Figure \ref{pupil-across-groups}A-D), but none of the comparisions shown in
each subplot yielded a statistically reliable difference between the groups
\added{(\emph{p}-values ranged from 0.075 to 0.165)}.

![(Color online). Mean across subjects (±1 S.E.M.) of deconvolved pupillary response (“effort”) for listening difficulty versus control groups, in switch- (top row) and maintain-attention trials (bottom row), in the three experimental conditions and pooled across all conditions (columns). In each subplot there were no temporal spans where the difference between groups was found to be significantly non-zero with a false discovery threshold of 0.05.\label{pupil-across-groups}](figures/capd-pupil-deconv-group-by-space-attn.pdf)

However, if instead we perform a within-subjects comparison of maintain- versus
switch-attention trials, a difference between subject groups emerges.
Specifically, for the listening difficulty group, there \replaced{are}{were} significant
differences in pupil response between maintain- versus switch-attention trials
that span most or all of the trial timecourse in all three segregation cue
conditions (Figure \ref{pupil-within-subjs}A-C) and also when all three
conditions \replaced{are}{were} pooled (Figure \ref{pupil-within-subjs}D), whereas the control
group only \replaced{shows}{showed} a statistically reliable difference between maintain- and
switch-attention trials during the return to baseline at the end of the trial,
and only in the two more difficult (spatial / non-spatial) conditions or when
conditions \replaced{are}{were} pooled (Figure \ref{pupil-within-subjs}E-H).

![(Color online). Mean across subjects (±1 S.E.M.) deconvolved pupillary response (“effort”) for maintain- versus switch-attention trials in subjects with self-reported listening difficulty (top row) and control subjects (bottom row), in the three cue conditions (left 3 columns) and pooled across all conditions (rightmost column). Hatching indicates temporal spans where the curves in each subplot differ significantly.\label{pupil-within-subjs}](figures/capd-pupil-deconv-attn-by-space-group.pdf)

## Summary of results

We compared behavioral performance (response accuracy and reaction time) and
pupillometry in an attention switching task in audiometrically normal listeners
who self-report listening difficulty, and in age-matched controls.  Overall,
behavioral differences between participant groups were limited: participants
with listening difficulty were more likely to respond to non-target non-foil
items in general, more likely to respond to foils in the spatial condition, and
tended to have slower response times in the final timing slot of non-spatial
switch-attention trials. Other behavioral results (not related to listener
group) recapitulated past findings from @McCloyEtAl2017: switching attention
leads to slower response times after the switch and also reduced accuracy<!--
both experiments -->; trials with only one stream segregation cue led to
reduced accuracy compared to trials with two cues<!-- experiment 1 -->; and
trials with only talker gender cues led to slower responses in the latter half
of the trial. <!-- Supplement: sections SIII.D.2, SIV.D.1 -->
In terms of pupillary response, there was no statistically significant
difference between listener groups when compared directly, but within-subject
differences between the maintain- and switch-attention conditions did show a
larger difference for participants with listening difficulty than for
age-matched controls.  <!--Nonetheless, the trend in the group comparison case
was consistently in the expected direction (greater effort for subjects in the
listening difficulty group), so the comparison might have yielded a
statistically reliable difference in a larger sample of listeners.-->

## Post-hoc analyses

One obvious question that arises from these results is whether the magnitude of
pupillary response — or the difference in response between switch- and
maintain-attention trials — reflects a supra-threshold deficit in auditory
spatial abilities.  To answer this question, we \replaced{computed}{compared}
summary measures for each subject’s pupillary response in the maintain- and
switch-attention trials\replaced[moved to new methods sub-section]{.
The summary measures were mean peak amplitude, mean peak latency, and mean area
under the curve (AUC).  The difference in AUC between attention conditions
(switch minus maintain) was also computed.  Each of these summary measures was
then compared to each subject’s component scores on the full Speech, Spatial,
and Qualities of Hearing assessment [SSQ; @SSQ], as well as their scores on a
range of behavioral measures representing binaural health: binaural masking
level differences with in-phase noise and in-phase or anti-phase signals (500
Hz signal; $N_0S_0$ and $N_0S_\pi$), frequency modulation detection thresholds
(500 Hz; monaural), interaural time- and level-difference detection thresholds
(ITD/ILD), alternating interaural phase detection thresholds (low-frequency
temporal fine structure test), and two versions of the Coordinate Response
Measure task (CRM; spatially separated or co-located talkers).}{against each
subject’s SSQ component scores and against a range of behavioral
measures representing binaural health (see Section \ref{posthocs}).} None of the
summary pupillary measures were significantly correlated with any of the
binaural health measures, nor with the component scores on the SSQ assessment.
Moreover, none of the summary pupillary measures <!--or binaural health
measures--> showed a significant difference between participant groups in
paired-samples _t_-tests<!--, though all three of the SSQ component scores did
significantly differ between groups--> (see Table \ref{table-ttests}).

\input{table-ttest}

Nevertheless, the behavioral and pupillometric results of this study suggest
that there is a meaningful difference between populations defined solely on the
basis of two binary self-report questions regarding spatial hearing and crowded
listening environments.  The fact that those differences are uncorrelated with
measures of auditory spatial abilities may indicate that the pupillary response
reflects some other (non-spatial) aspect of auditory system function, or that
the relationship between the pupillary response and the various measures of
binaural health is sufficiently subtle as to require a much larger sample of
listeners to detect.

# Discussion

This study compared behavioral and pupillometric measures between groups of
audiometrically normal subjects who either do or do not report difficulty
localizing sound sources and/or understanding speech in reverberant or
acoustically crowded environments.  Specifically, we compared behavioral
performance (response accuracy and reaction time) and pupillometry in an
attention switching task, with three conditions varying the available stream
segregation cues. The goal was to determine whether pupillometry could serve as
an objective measure to index self-reported listening difficulty. <!-- that
reflects the hypothesized supra-threshold auditory coding deficit hypothesized
to underlie such difficulties. -->

Overall, we saw a significant pupillary response difference between switch- and
maintain-attention trials in the listening difficulty group but not in the
control group.  We also saw behavioral differences between groups in certain
conditions, though there was no clear “main effect of group” on response
accuracy or reaction time.  Together, the behavioral and pupillometric findings
suggest that the difference between groups was a rather subtle one — not a
terribly surprising finding given that all participants were audiometrically
normal and individually age-matched.

The apparent failure to reproduce the pupillometric results of @McCloyEtAl2017
\added{(i.e., the finding that pupil dilation is greater on switch-attention trials,
and begins to diverge from maintain-attention trials as soon as the pre-trial
cue is heard)}
in the control population is less worrisome than it might seem: the prior study
involved stimulus degradations that may have increased difficulty in the
switch-attention trials more strongly than the maintain-attention trials,
either by specifically impacting the ability to re-deploy selective attention
after a switch, or by raising the baseline effort level such that even
listeners with normal hearing were overtaxed in the switch-attention task.  In
contrast, the present study involved no stimulus degradations, so the more
modest difference in pupillary response between switch- and maintain-attention
trials in the control population may mean that switching attention is simply
not especially effortful for those listeners (which accords with their negative
responses to the screening questions about difficulty with spatial hearing and
crowded auditory environments).

It is noteworthy that the post-hoc group comparison _t_-tests did
_not_ find a significant difference between groups based on the various summary
measures of the pupillary response (peak amplitude, peak latency, or area under
the curve; cf. Table \ref{table-ttests}), even when comparing the
switch-minus-maintain AUC values (i.e., each subject’s gap between the average
pupillary response to switch-attention trials versus maintain-attention
trials).  At first glance this would seem to contradict the difference between
groups seen in Figure \ref{pupil-within-subjs}.  However, the statistical test
illustrated in Figure \ref{pupil-within-subjs} shows that, among subjects with
listening difficulty, the average size of the gap is big enough to conclude
that it is statistically non-zero throughout most or all of the trial, whereas
in the control subjects the average size of the gap is generally not big enough
to draw that conclusion.  In contrast, the post-hoc _t_-test of AUC values
looks at total gap size for each subject and compares the distribution of gap
sizes between the two groups, which is more closely analogous to the
statistical comparisons shown in Figure \ref{pupil-across-groups}.

Also of interest is the temporal pattern of differences in the pupillary
responses, especially regarding the difference between maintain- and
switch-attention trials (Figure \ref{pupil-within-subjs}).  Specifically, in
the listening difficulty group, we see a replication of previous findings
[@McCloyEtAl2017] showing that the difference in pupillary response between
maintain- and switch-attention trials begins when the pre-trial cue is heard,
suggesting that the pupillary response in switch-attention trials reflects
preparation or planning for upcoming attention switches.  Interestingly, in the
spatial and mixed conditions, there is some indication of acausality in the
pupillary response: the divergence of the maintain- and switch-attention pupil
traces appears to occur during or even slightly before the cue letter that
indicates the attentional condition for each trial.  It is likely that the
acausality is due to the parameters of the deconvolution kernel, which suggests
that future studies using this technique may benefit from estimating kernel
parameters separately for each subject, rather than relying on published
parameter estimates [cf. discussion in @McCloyEtAl2016]. It is also noteworthy
that the pupil traces for the control subjects seem to show faster recovery
(i.e., a more pronounced dip in pupillary response between the two halves of
the trial; this is easiest to see in Figure \ref{pupil-across-groups}A-D).  The
significance of this observation is not known, and merits further
investigation.

Taking a wider perspective, many questions remain about supra-threshold
auditory deficits, the pupillary response, and the experience of listening
difficulty or effort.   There is some precedent in the literature for a
relationship between pupillary response and self-reported listening effort
[e.g., @ZekveldEtAl2011], though in most cases self-reported measures are taken
in the same session as the behavioral and physiological measures (in some cases
immediately after each trial block). Thus it is perhaps a little surprising
that two simple questions regarding listening difficulty were sufficient to
yield detectable group differences in both behavioral and physiological
responses in our data, especially given that the participants in the listening
difficulty group were all asked the questions during initial screenings more
than six weeks prior to their performance of the experimental task.  That said,
the questions were quite specific to sound localization and listening in
multitalker environments, which may have increased their diagnostic utility
over more open-ended self-report measures. Screening questions such as these
may prove to be valuable tools for future studies<!--, especially given the
lack of universally accepted diagnostic criteria for (central) auditory
processing disorder [@WilsonArnott2012]-->.

Still, an important question remains regarding the causes of listening
difficulty.  If all we had was listeners’ self-report, we wouldn’t know whether
an objective physiological difference underlied listeners’ assessments of their
own abilities.  What the current study shows is that there are indeed
behavioral and physiological differences to be found that are associated with
differences in self-assessment.  However, the current study does not establish
that those physiological differences are in fact the common cause driving both
differences in behavior and differences in self-assessment: given that pupil
dilation reflects a wide range of task-related variables such as memory demands
[@Taylor1981], mathematical complexity [@HessPolt1964], stimulus degradation
[@WinnEtAl2015], and various linguistic properties of words or sentences
[@ZekveldEtAl2010; @PapeshGoldinger2012], it is entirely possible that a
listener’s *belief* that they are bad at certain kinds of listening tasks might
sufficiently increase their arousal during such tasks as to elevate the
magnitude of their evoked pupil response.  At the same time, low
self-assessment of listening abilities could likewise reduce behavioral
performance in psychophysics tasks, analogous to the effects of internalized
stereotypes on test performance [e.g., @SteeleAronson1995; @SpencerEtAl1999;
@RiciputiErdal2017]. Put another way, we cannot tell definitively whether
differences in self-assessment of listening abilities *cause* both the
behavioral and pupillometric differences, or whether differences in
self-assessment *result from* observed differences in behavioral ability, which
in turn may arise from physiological differences. Clearly, further work is
needed to refine our understanding of the experience of effortful listening.

[^supp]: See Supplementary materials at [URL will be inserted by AIP]
for model summary tables.

# References
